
General Instructions :
Read the following instructions very carefully and follow them :
(i) This	question	paper	contains	33	questions.	All	questions	are compulsory.
(ii) Question paper is divided into FIVE sections -  Section A, B, C, D
andE.
(iii) Section A - Question number 1 to 16 are Multiple Choice (MCQ) type questions. Each question carries 1 mark.
(iv) Section B - Question number 17 to 21 are Very Short Answer type questions. Each question carries 2 mark.
(v) Section C - Question number 22 to 28 are Short Answer type questions. Each question carries 3 mark.
(vi) Section D: Question number 29 and 30 are Case-Based questions. Each question carries 4 mark.
(vii) Section E - Question number 31 to 33 are Long Answer type questions. Each question carries 5 mark.
(viii) There is no overall choice given in the question paper. However, an internal choice has been provided in few questions in all the Sections except Section-A.
(ix) Kindly note that there is a separate question paper for Visually Impaired candidates.
(x) Use of calculators is NOT allowed.
You may use the following values of physical constants wherever necessary :
c = 3 x 108 m/s
h = 6.63 x 10-34 Js
e = 1. 6 x 10-19 C
µ0 = 4n x 10- 7 T m A-1
Eo = 8.854 X 10-12 C2 N-1 m-2
-1- = 9 x 109 N m2 c-2
41tEo
Mass of electron (m8) = 9.1 x 10-31 kg Mass of neutron= 1.675 x 10-27 kg Mass of proton= 1.673 x 10-27 kg
Avogadro's number= 6.023 x 1023 per gram mole Boltzmann constant= 1.38 x 10-23 JK-1


SECTION-A	16 X 1 = 16
1. An electric dipole of dipole moment Ji is kept in a uniform electric field E . The	amount of work done to rotate it from the  position of stable
equilibrium to that of unstable equilibrium will be	1
(A) 2 pE	(B)	-2 pE
(C)	pE	(D)	zero
2. An infinite long straight wire having a charge density A is kept along y'y axis in x-y plane. The Coulomb force on a point charge q at a point P (x, 0)
will be	1

(A) attractive and

  qA 	(B)
21tEoX

repu1

s1. ve and	 qA 
21tEoX

(C) attractive and

1tEoX
(D) 
repulsive and

1tEoX

3. The phase difference between electric field E and magnetic field B in an electromagnetic wave propagating along z-axis is -	1
(A) zero	(B)	n
(C) n	(D) n
2	4
4. In Balmer series of hydrogen atom, as the wavelength of spectral lines decreases, they appear	1
(A) equally spaced and equally intense.
(B) further apart and stronger in intensity.
(C) closer together and stronger in intensity.
(D) closer together and weaker in intensity.
5. Two long straight parallel conductors A and B, kept at a distance r, carry current I in opposite directions. A third identical conductor C, kept at a
distance (;)  from A carry current 11 in the same direction as in A. The
net magnetic force on unit length of C is	1

(A) 3µol 11	towards  A	(B)
2nr	'
(C)	3µol 11 , towards A	(D)

3µ0I I1	towards B
2nr	'
3µ0I I1	towards B



4nr

4nr	'


6. A  coil  of  N  turns  is  placed  in  a  magnetic  field  B  such  that  B is  perpendicular  to the  plane of the  coil.  B changes  with time as B = B0 cos (   t) where Tis  time period. The magnitude of emf induced
in the coil will be maximum at	1

(A) t = nT
8
(B) 


t =	nT 
4

(C) 

t=-	nT
2
(D) 
t = nT

Here, n = 1, 2, 3, 4, ...
7. A circular loop A of radius R carries a current I. Another circular loop B of radius r( =	is	placed concentrically in the plane of A. The magnetic
flux linked with loop Bis proportional to	1
(A) R	(B) R
_Q_
(C)	R2	(D)	R2
8. A galvanometer of resistance 100 Q is converted into an ammeter of range (0 - 1 A) using a resistance of 0.1 n. The ammeter will show full scale
deflection for a current of about	1

(A) 0.1 mA
(C)	10 mA
(B) 
1 mA
(D)	0.1 A

9. The r.m.s. value of a current given by i = (i1 cos cot+ i2 sin cot) is -
(A) 1	(.	.	)	(B)	1	(.	.	)
(C)	
10. The	quantum nature of light explains the observations on photoelectric effect as -	1
(A) there is a minimum frequency of incident radiation below which no electrons are emitted.
(B) the maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons depends only on the frequency of incident radiation.
(C) when the metal surface is illuminated, electrons are ejected from the surface after sometime.
(D) the photoelectric current is independent of the intensity of incident radiation.


11. The magnetic susceptibility for a diamagnetic material is	1
(A) small and negative	(B)	small and positive
(C)	large and negative	(D)	large and positive

12. The radius (rn) of nth orbit in Bohr model of hydrogen atom varies with n
as	1
1

(A)

rn oc n

(B)

r	oc - n

(C) r n oc n2	(D)

r	oc - 1 n2


Note : For questions number 13 to 16, two statements are given - one labelled Assertion (A) and the other labelled Reason (R). Select the correct answer to these questions from the codes (A), (B), (C) and (D) as given below :
(A) If both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is the correct explanation of Assertion (A).
(B) If both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true and Reason (R) is not the correct explanation of Assertion (A).
(C) If Assertion (A) is true and Reason (R) is false.
(D) If both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are false.
13. Assertion (A) : When electrons drift in a conductor, it does not mean that all free electrons in the conductor are moving in the same direction.
Reason (R) : The drift velocity is superposed over large random velocities
of electrons.	1
14. Assertion (A) : In interference and diffraction of light, light energy reduces in one region producing a dark fringe. It increases in another region and produces a bright fringe.
Reason (R) : This happens because energy is not conserved in the phenomena of interference and diffraction.	1
15. Assertion (A) : The temperature coefficient of resistance is positive for metals and negative for p-type semiconductors.
Reason (R) : The charge carriers in metals are negatively charged, whereas the majority charge carriers in p-type semiconductors are positively charged.	1
16. Assertion (A) : Electrons are ejected from the surface of zinc when it is irradiated by yellow light.
Reason (R) : Energy associated with a photon of yellow light is more than the work function of zinc.	1


SECTION-B	5 X 2 = 10
17. (a) An air bubble is trapped at point B (CB = 20 cm) in a glass sphere of radius 40 cm and refractive index 1.5 as shown in figure. Find the nature and position of the image of the bubble as seen by an observer
at point P.	2

OR
(b) In normal adjustment, for a refracting telescope, the distance between objective and eye piece lens is 1.00 m. If the magnifying power of the telescope is 19, find the focal length of the objective and
the eyepiece lens.	2
18. The ratio of de Broglie wavelengths of a proton and a deuteron accelerated
by potential VP and  Vd	respectively, ( /\,P] is _! . Find VP .	2
A,d	2	Vd
19. A ray of light is incident normally on one face of an  equilateral glass prism of refractive index µ. When the prism is completely immersed in a transparent medium, it is observed that the emergent ray just grazes the adjacent face. Find the refractive index of the medium.	2
20. Find the temperature at which the resistance of a conductor increases by 25% of its value at 27 °C. The temperature coefficient of resistance of the
conductor is 2.0 x 10-4 °c-1.	2
21. Draw the circuit diagram of a p-n junction diode in (i) forward biasing and
(ii) reverse biasing. Also draw its 1-V characteristics in the two cases.	2

SECTION- C
22. (a)	(i)	Define mutual inductance. Write its SI unit.

7 X 3 = 21
3

(ii)  Derive an expression for the mutual inductance of a system of two long coaxial solenoids of same length l, having turns N1 and N2 and of radii r1 and r2 (> r1).
OR
(b)	What are ferromagnetic materials ? Explain ferromagnetism with
the help of suitable diagrams, using the concept of magnetic domain.	3
23. Two conducting spherical shells A and B of radii R and 2R are kept far apart and charged to the same charge density cr. They are connected by a wire. Obtain an expression for final potential of shell A.	3
24. Draw the graph showing variation of scattered particles detected (N) with the scattering angle (0) in Geiger-Marsden experiment. Write two conclusions that you can draw from this graph. Obtain the expression for
the distance of closest approach in this experiment.	3
25. In the given network, calculate :
(i) effective resistance between points A and M, and
(ii) power supplied by the battery.	3



26. An infinite straight conductor is kept along X'X axis and carries a current
I. A charge q at point P(O, r) starts moving with velocity 1 = v0 j as shown in figure. Find the direction and magnitude of force initially experienced by the charge.	3
27. Explain the following giving reasons:
(i) 'Electromagnetic	waves	differ	considerably	in	their	mode	of interaction with matter'.
(ii) 'Food items to be heated in microwave oven must contain water'.
(iii) 'Welders wear face mask with glasses during welding'.	3

28. (a)
(b)

Differentiate between nuclear fission and fusion.	3
The fission properties of 94Pu239 are very similar to those of 92U235. How much energy (in MeV), is released if all the atoms in 1 g of pure 94Pu239 undergo fission ? The average energy released per fission is 180 MeV.


SECTION-D	2x4=8
Note : Questions number 29 to 30 are Case Study based questions. Read the following paragraph and answer the questions that follow.
29. A pure semiconductor like Ge or Si, when doped with a small amount of suitable impurity, becomes an extrinsic semiconductor. In thermal equilibrium, the electron and hole concentration in it are related to the concentration of intrinsic charge carriers. A p-type or n-type semiconductor can be converted into a p-n junction by doping it with suitable impurity. Two processes, diffusion and drift take place during formation of a p-n junction. A semiconductor diode is basically a p-n junction with metallic contacts provided at the ends for the application of an external voltage. A p-n junction diode allows currents to pass only in one direction when it is forward biased. Due to this property, a diode is widely used to rectify alternating voltages, in half-wave or full wave
configuration.	4 x 1 = 4


(i) When Ge is doped with pentavalent impurity, the energy required to free the weakly bound electron from the dopant is about
(A) 0.001 eV	(B)  0.01 eV
(C)  0.72 eV	(D)  1.1 eV
(ii) At a given temperature, the number of intrinsic charge carriers in a semiconductor is 2.0 x 1010 cm-3. It is doped with pentavalent impurity atoms. As a result, the number of holes in it becomes 8 x 103 cm-3. The number of electrons in the semiconductor is
(A) 2 x 1024 m-3	(B)  4 x 1023 m-3
(C)  1 x 1022 m-3	(D)  5 x 1022 m-3
(iii) (a)  During the formation of a p-n junction -
(A) electrons diffuse from p-region into n-region and holes diffuse from n-region into p-region.
(B) both electrons and holes diffuse from n-region into p-region.
(C) electrons diffuse from n-region into p-region and holes diffuse from p-region into n-region.
(D) both electrons and holes diffuse from p-region into n-region.
OR
(iii) (b)	Initially during the formation of a p-n junction -
(A) diffusion current is large and drift current is small.
(B) diffusion current is small and drift current is large.
(C) both the diffusion and the drift currents are large.
(D) both the diffusion and the drift currents are small.
(iv) An ac voltage V = 0.5 sin (100 nt) volt is applied, in turn, across a half-wave rectifier and a full-wave rectifier. The frequency of the output voltage across them respectively will be
(A) 25 Hz, 50 Hz	(B)  25 Hz, 100 Hz
(C)  50 Hz, 50 Hz	(D)  50 Hz, 100 Hz

30. A lens is a transparent optical medium bounded by two surfaces; at least one of which should be spherical. Applying the formula of image formation by a single spherical surface successively at the two surfaces of a thin lens, a formula known as lens maker's formula and hence the basic lens formula can be obtained. The focal length (or power) of a lens depends on the radii of its surfaces and the refractive index of its material with respect to the surrounding medium. The refractive index of a material depends on the wavelength of light used. Combination of lenses helps us to  obtain  diverging  or  converging  lenses  of  desired  power  and
magnification.	4 x 1 = 4


(i) A thin converging lens of focal length 20 cm and a thin diverging lens of focal length 15 cm are placed coaxially in contact. The power of the combination is


(A)

--D5
6


(B) 

--D5
3

(C) 4D 
3
(D) 
i D
2

(ii) The radii of curvature of two surfaces of a convex lens are R and 2R.
If the focal length of this lens is(:) R, the refractive index of the
material of the lens is:
(A) 5	(B)	4
3	3
(C)	3	(D)	7
2	5
(iii) The focal length of an equiconvex lens
(A) increases when the lens is dipped in water.
(B) increases when the wavelength of incident light decreases.
(C) increases with decrease in radius of curvature of its surface.
(D) decreases when the lens is cut into two identical parts along its principal axis.
(iv) (a)  A thin convex lens L of focal length 10 cm and a concave mirror M of focal length 15 cm are placed coaxially 40 cm apart as shown in figure. A beam of light coming parallel to the principal axis is incident on the lens. The final image will be formed at a distance of



(A) 10 cm, left of lens
(C)	20 cm, left of lens
OR
(B) 
10 cm, right of lens
(D) 20 cm, right of lens


(iv) (b)  A beam of light coming parallel to the principal axis of a convex lens L1 of focal length 16 cm is incident on it. Another convex lens L2 of focal length 12 cm is placed coaxially at a distance 40 cm from L1. The nature and distance of the final image from L2 will be

(A) real, 24 cm
(C)	real, 32 cm
(B) 
virtual, 12 cm
(D)	virtual, 18 cm


SECTION-E	3 X 5 = 15
31. (a)  (i)  A dielectric slab of dielectric constant 'K' and thickness 't' is inserted between plates of a parallel plate capacitor of plate separation d and plate area A. Obtain an expression for its capacitance.
(ii) Two capacitors of different capacitances are connected first (1) in series and then (2) in parallel across a de source of 100 V. If the total energy stored in the combination in the two cases are 40 mJ
and 250 mJ respectively, find the capacitance of the capacitors.	5
OR
(b)	(i)	Using Gauss's law, show that the electric field E at a point due to
a uniformly charged infinite plane sheet is given by i =	cr
Eo
where symbols have their usual meanings.

(ii)	Electric field E in a region is given by

I\
E	(5x2 + 2) i
where E is in N/C and x is in meters.
A cube of side 10 cm is placed in the region as shown in figure.

Calculate (1) the	electric flux through the cube, and (2) the	net charge enclosed by the cube.		5


32. (a)  (i)  Draw a ray diagram for the formation of the image of an object by a convex mirror. Hence, obtain the mirror equation.
(ii) Why are multi-component lenses used for both the objective and the eyepiece in optical instruments ?
(iii) The magnification of a small object produced by a compound microscope is 200. The focal length of the eyepiece is 2 cm and the final image is formed at infinity. Find the magnification
produced by the objective.	5
OR
(b) (i)	Differentiate between a wavefront and a ray.
(ii) State Huygen's principle and verify laws of reflection using suitable diagram.
(iii) In Young's double slit experiment, the slits 81 and 82 are 3 mm apart and the screen is placed 1.0 m away from the slits. It is observed that the fourth bright fringe is at a distance of 5 mm from the second dark fringe. Find the wavelength of light used.	5
33. (a)	(i)	Mention the factors on which the resonant frequency of a series LCR	circuit	depends.	Plot	a	graph	showing	variation	of impedance of a series LCR circuit with the frequency of the applied a.c. source.
(ii) With the help of a suitable diagram, explain the working of a step-up transformer.
(iii) Write two causes of energy loss in a real transformer.	5
OR
(b)	(i)	With the help of a diagram, briefly explain the construction and working of ac generator.
(ii)	An electron is revolving around a proton in an orbit of radius r with a speed v. Obtain expression for magnetic moment associated with
the electron.	5
























